Title: PyCharm
Date: 2023-10-20
Tags: python

I still use PyCharm as my daily text editor. 

IDEs like PyCharm have tons of features and the 80/20 rule applies: investing 20% effort learning the tool will get you 80% productivity. 
The rest is marginal gains and your effort is better spent thinking about your code.

Here, I'll enumerate the subset of functionality that I use.

## Keyboard Shortcuts 

1. **Cmd + O**  - Goto file or class
2. **Ctrl + G**  - Select the next matching text.
3. **Cmd + B** - Jump to the definition or usages of a class, function, or variable.
4. **Cmd + X** - Cut. Use this to delete a line of code.
5. **Cmd + C** / **Ctrl + V** - Copy and paste 
6. **Cmd + /** - Toggle commenting. 
7. **Tab** / **Shift + Tab** - Increase or decrease the indentation level.
8. **Ctrl + R** - Rerun the previous file, test, or command


## GUI Features

You can use PyCharm to just edit text but that misses the point of an IDE.

- Refactor. PyCharm handles renaming and moving seamlessly. You don't need to go and find every instance a Class is imported and rename it. Just use the tool once and it'll "just work" everywhere.

- Managing conda environments and keeping them sync with `requirements.txt`. 
PyCharm will warn you if a package is outdated. If so, in the terminal tab I'll run 

```bash
conda activate py39 
pip install -r requirements.txt
``` 
I don't use PyCharm to manage Python environments. 

- Running tests. You can run directory or file or individual tests. Very handy with the debugger. 

- Run file in Python console. This runs the file and then leaves you with a Python prompt so you can interactively use the code you just wrote. I use IPython here. 

- Markdown.
PyCharm can render markdown files. There's a new table editor so you don't have to mess around with the `-- and |` characters. 

- Git
I don't recommend using PyCharm for most git actions but it has a handy rollback button, a neat diff viewer between branches, and a nice tool to fix merge conflicts. 

- Formatting.
Don't bother making your code pretty. It can be any color you want as long as it's black. 
```bash
black ../src-code-dir
```

## Summary 

What's the cost of this?
The "Community Edition" is free and that's what I use.
[PyCharm Community Edition](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download)
It's been around for a long time and I don't expect it to go anywhere.